We're talking to Charles Knudsen.
This is the Nigerian collection.
These are papers that I collected even while the Nigerian war was going on from people I knew in Africa and other book theaters still love.
Even when the Nigerians come to the collection, they're amazed and say, where do you get this material from?
We don't have the various pamphlets from the little villages.
So where do you get it from?
Well, I got it from dealers, and people sent things to me during the war.
We have more catalog here.
But I mean, you have stuff that the Nigerian government doesn't have.
On the war, because, right, yes.
So this is one of the, on the AME, we have a large church collection on the black church.
One of the,
one of the most important collections around.
I mean, uh-oh.
Do you have a, uh, is this the first?
This is the first binding, I know.
No, this is, um, this is about the 1870s.
Yeah.
Do you have the first of us?
No, no, I, I, it's for some reason.
I didn't want to put the money out to buy.
I mean, it's important, but, you know, one of the other things.
I got it, you know.
You do.
This is the, um.
I got a wonderful sculpture.
No kidding.
This is the, um, I forgot what edition this is.
Well, actually, it doesn't matter.
It's been rebounded.
It's the textbook.
Yeah, this is the textbook.
I mean, it's important, but I could have had it.
But there's so many other things I wanted, you know.
That's a lot of money for that.
Yeah, because, you know, I can buy books, for instance, something on the Harlem Renaissance period, or books on something like the Caribbean.
You know, there's certain books, libraries,
Every library should have Uncle Tom Cabin.
I have copies published in Pennsylvania Dutch, you know, which I'll show you.
And I have some other obscured copies.
But there's some of the key books, most of the key books that pertain to African American history and black history I have.
So therefore I have all of the Harlem Renaissance writers.
Right at work with Charles Chestnut and Dunbar, have all the Dunbar and things like that.
That's the gentleman whose portrait you have in the reading room.
Yes.
What room was this, by the way, that we were just in?
We call this our special collection room.
Okay.
The main collection, we're scattered all over.
How many rooms do you have?
About eight to nine.
Wow.
But we're scattered out.
And I have some here.
There are books.
You saw some in the big room.
Some of these were my key books.
Remind me to show you the book that's down in the skin.
Okay.
I've been doing this since I was even when I had the material in my home.
These are stars here again.
These are letters.
It goes back to 1963, 64.
I save all my letters.
All your correspondence.
All my correspondence.
This is your personal correspondence, yeah.
From Alice Walker, from Gloria Steinem, you know, from all kinds of people from all over the world.
You know, there's alphabetical.
It is broken down to, you know, different...
You see a letter from Paul Robeson Jr., and, you know, scholars, and it goes over.
These are the letters I answered, you know.
And that way, if people come in here, they will know.
Here's some more of Robeson.
Robeson was always my idol, and I was able to meet him, you know, while he was here and all.
R-O-B-E-S-O-N.
Paul Robeson, yeah.
These are, we call this our periodical room.
And evidently, as I said, we have small rooms in the back.
But once we get this all together, you'll sell bigger.
There's the Caribbean Journal, books and magazines from Africa, African literature, the praise on Afrikaans, the writings of blacks, the Francophones, blacks who went to Paris and they published this magazine, the praise on Afrikaans.
We have the first issue of Jet Magazine.
Did you realize when you were beginning, look at this, these are all Jet Magazine.
We're looking at it.
The first issue of it, which is quite rare now.
So you have a full run?
No.
I have an important run of it, but some of the 50s, early 60s, I'm still getting it.
This is the first issue.
That's number one.
It costs 15 cents now.
Wow.
A dollar and a quarter.
I'm sure they don't call themselves the weekly Negro news magazine.
No, no.
I can't take too much of that.
Hey, can you get over that?
It's like, but it's, I always say to Jack and Heavenly because they always contain important history, you know.
It's journalism, too, which is a mirror of what's going on.
In an immediate sense.
That's true, and that way you keep afloat with history.
Now, I'm going to go on the other side of this thing.
This is your office here?
Yes, this is my office.
And usually it's clean off because I have about 35 phone calls to make.
We can, you know, let's do this like in about an hour, you know, if you want.
Well, we'll take a little time.
No, I'm not saying I came back.
I had that book.
This is a booster.
Robeson signed to me for me.
I was even one of the few people in the world to be able to see him while he lived here in the city of Philadelphia.
And his sister, Mrs. Marion Foresight, permitted me to see Paul.
And you see he signed it.
I can see his signature.
And I have other books.
Well, it's inscribed, actually.
Yes, to me.
to Charles Blockson from Paul Robeson, Black American Film Festival, 1917 to 1972.
I also have other books.
I have his personal book here by his wife, which he wrote in 1931, Paul Robeson's Negro, signed by her.
Isn't that something?
It came from his personal collection after his son sold the collection to the Argosy bookstore.
It's Marian Anderson.
I'm just going to grab one of these, okay?
Yeah, take a couple.
There's a picture of myself involved, Marian, right over the corner.
We had an exhibition and a concert for her in February, January, and I was able to go up to her home in Danbury, Connecticut, and here you see over there in the corner, she's talking to me.
She was one of them, along with Robeson and Joe Lewis and Marian Anderson.
They were the heroes of our day in the 1940s.
I mean, they were the people that black, most Americans point out as role models.
You can imagine how I felt in meeting my heroes of my childhood, Marian Anderson and Paul Robeson, you know.
And as you know, I just put a record, a poster, I mean a marker, a historical state marker for Robeson in front of the house that he stayed in for 10 years in Philadelphia near the University of Pennsylvania.
So it's like my life has gone full circles, you know.
I'm able to give back
to people, to children, and of all races, what these people had provided for me, you know, as a child.
And where did you grow up?
I grew up in Norristown, Pennsylvania, which is 18 miles from Philadelphia, you know.
So, I mean, I would come down here when I wasn't driving on the train to the O'Leary's, O'Leary, it's like L-E-A-L-Y, we call it the O'Leary bookstore, and I used to get, purchase,
books that people just discarded.
When you were in high school?
In junior high school.
So you were collecting?
Oh, yeah.
I started out in grade school collecting when I was in the— That story is that—that's eight years old, right?
Yeah, when I was teaching—yes, I didn't know what I was doing.
I became a collector before I knew it.
So I went to salvaging armies and goods and will stores and all, but, you know, I went there for another reason.
Before I was the oldest of nine.
I mean, at that time, we had about—a sister and brother, I guess it was about four of us.
I mean, basically, you know, the oldest of mine had one brother who died in death.
But nevertheless, we went there for a while for shoes, for clothes, for furniture.
So much now.
And so, of course, they had books there.
At the time, when the teacher told me that, I just had an interest.
Say for the record, for my typist and for what the teacher told you.
You're eight years old and you're in school.
Yeah, in school.
And I asked the teacher...
and an integrated school district.
I never had.
It was in Norristown.
Norristown, Pennsylvania, the same town where Tom Lasorda came from and so forth.
But nevertheless, growing up in an integrated town on my street, there were Greeks, not because you are Greek, there were Italians, there were Irish, there were Germans, there were Polish people.
So we had a mixture of people at the time, and most of us was poor as far as wealth.
But as far as love and friendship, you know, if one, Mrs. Nellican, the Irish family, her mother was ill, my mother would bring soup or something to them, and the Italian family.
So we had this community, you know, the bond.
And as I said, I never had a black teacher in my life, even at Penn State, due to the fact that the Norristown integration didn't start there as teachers until 1960.
So I asked the teacher, did we have any heroes?
Besides Booker T. Washington.
Did the black people have any heroes?
Yeah, they didn't black people.
She said, no, Charles.
Negroes were born to serve white people.
Now, she was a victim of her environment, you know.
I mean, although at the time... She said that.
Did you say this in front of the class?
Oh, yes.
Because it was common.
You know, I mean, we were taught, and she was taught, she was a victim of her environment, you know, that she was...
I'm sorry.
She's a teacher.
She should have known better.
But there are teachers today.
That's why you have all this Afrocentricity.
They're going back to the same stuff they had in 1960.
History pieces.
Remember in 1960, they had the black power movement, integrated schools and all.
The thing became lax.
Now Afrocentricity.
And a lot of people believe... Afrocentricity.
Yeah.
Newsweek magazine is promoting that now.
There's a big article there.
What I'm saying is that although I knew
from my childhood, sitting around the steps, listening to my mother, and my father, my grandfather, and others, and you know, and the people in the black barber shop, they talked, they spoke, they spoke of here, they spoke of Booker T. White, they spoke of Jack Johnson, they spoke of other people, but I was curious, I always loved books since I was a child, because I was reading the Gwen Grimm fairy tales, and later I, you know,
It would be developed into Westerns, but I was always amazed that there weren't that many black people.
But of course, we did know of Booker T. Washington, and later, when she told me that, the first book I found, by chance, Curiosity, was when I went to, there was an ex-copy, I mean, there was a copy of Booker T. Washington's famous book, Up From Slavery.
Then I found...
So tell me, what did you think when the woman said this to you?
No, because I was like confused.
I was confused.
You know, I was confused because I know, I knew that, listen to the old folks talk about, you know, Matthew Henson, or Jack Johnson, or Joe Lewis, and Mary Anderson, Roland Hayes, Paul Robeson, and other people, and later I discovered Langston Hughes, you know, and, but at the time,
We were brainwashed through Hollywood also, because we never showed any black cowboys in those days.
Now we know there are books by Bill Pickett, you know, in the other room, and they love.
I have these books of cowboys.
But at the time, Hollywood, you were programmed, I mean, Wedding Market was programmed, and we were programmed due to the fact we showed Eddie McDaniel as the black mammies and going with the wind.
So as this teacher later found, she was a good woman.
She was a precious person.
A lot of people feel like she was a teacher.
So there's other teachers.
What a thing to say to a child, though.
I'm sorry, I've got an eight-year-old guy right here.
The times, you think they're more progressive.
You have television, you have the Don Cosby family, a new Bill for a long while when he was here at the... I'd like to hear a quote from Bill about you.
Do you think that's possible?
I don't know.
If he can get to it and see, it's hard to... Does he know what's happening with the collection?
Yeah, he knows.
Just a letter, you know what I mean?
Yeah, maybe.
I don't know exactly how... I'm talking about a formal interview.
I think you could give me a quote.
I certainly would like one from the president of the university.
Yeah, well, Peter could give you one.
Yeah.
Maybe that's probably the more appropriate.
Peter would know the bill's private number, too.
Peter would give you one.
Anyhow, I was talking about the teacher.
Later, she told me.
You gave me what, by the way?
You said you gave me what, and I interrupted you?
You mailed me a magazine article.
Yeah, this one here.
I got that.
Okay.
Yeah.
We'll sit down a minute.
Let's see what's going on.
Okay.
You got my newsletter there, didn't you?
Yeah.
Just grab one of the... Yeah, I got that and I got this.
Okay.
I got everything.
These are... These are... Let me just... Let me show you this, please.
Look at all the messages on your desk.
Go ahead.
Well, this is nothing up here.
You have to be half of his guard.
Now, where are you going today?
Where's this next trip to?
I was supposed to go to West Virginia, so we're going to have a meeting...
with the superintendent, so that was postponed.
I got back a little late from the plane from Brazil.
Now, was Brazil a working trip?
It was a vacation, which I only usually take.
I mean, I only take about four, five, six days of my vacation of a month.
But I went down there.
It turned out, while I was down there, I went to some universities and met some historians and all.
I put up a vacation.
I went to Bahia, which is the African part of Brazil, located in Salvador.
the B-A-H-I-A, the old B-A-H-I-A by E-S.
It was the old capital of Brazil, and that's where they had the strongest African-Brazilian influence, because right across the Atlantic they were bringing the Africans from Benin, which is now Dahomey.
But Dahomey, which is now Benin, was right across the river.
They had more African-Americans than Brazil.
People of African descent in Brazil, the United States,
which shocked some people, but we have about 30 million.
There they had 50 million.
Wow.
Did they know they were slaves?
Oh, yeah, because they're right across the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa.
They just took it right across.
So it was a waste station, basically.
Oh, it was a major waste station.
Yeah.
It was quicker to bring it from, say, the Guinea, the coast of Guinea, which is Nigeria, Dahomey, Senegal, right across to, you know, so it was easier than coming up.
So this is why you have the strongest influence,
I went to some Orisha's temple revisions, and I was able to make, because I have a lot of books on Brazil, but it felt like I was in Africa.
I was in Africa before.
It's like I went to the Caribbean and had the same spiritual, it was a highly spiritual trip, plus the fact on the day before I was leaving, I was walking, I had a few hours on my plane in Rio de Janeiro.
I spent three nights in Rio de Janeiro and four dairies.
I was walking, they had a lot of vendors there selling fruit from the fruit markets, black, white and all.
And one guy is strange.
I was walking down the street.
They were selling bees, belts, and jewelry.
Jewelry is very cheap.
Gold is cheap down there and so forth.
And this vendor had a color print, you know, of a S&Y guy.
And I walked over to him.
I said, well, how much is it?
He spoke in Portuguese and a little bit of English and with my little Spanish.
I said, how much he went for these?
He said, well, all told, there was six of them, you know, for about, I think it was about, because there was, it was about $40.
I mean, beautiful hand, well, I mean, prints, 1823, in historical prints, and it showed the history.
It's this trip.
Yeah, it showed the history of Bahia.
It was during the slave period.
How did people return?
I couldn't believe it.
So I bought them all.
It was so cheap.
The economy is very low then and now.
I said, this is a godsend, my last day of Gordon's leaving.
That's the serendipity of collecting, you know?
I mean, we are strange.
We are a special breed.
That's what my book is about.
Am I right?
That's what the book is about.
I said, it's like the agony in the escasee of, you know.
Then I said, well, it's a natural flow for me as a collector from my last day.
and to come across like they're just waiting for me in this thing.
And this is wonderful.
This is wonderful.
Now, I'll get back to the story.
I put my pen down when stuff comes out.
I've been in too many readings.
Yeah, I know.
This is my junior high school.
Now, your position, what was the name of the high school team you played for?
I played for Norristown.
Norristown High School.
Running back?
Yeah, running back.
This is my junior high school.
This is Stewart, S-T-E-W-A-R-T, Stewart Junior High School.
We scored four touchdowns.
We beat our arch rivals.
This is the 50s now, 60s?
This is the 40s, late 40s, late 40s.
Late 40s from junior high school.
So this is high school, early 50s here.
How old are you now, might I ask?
Oh, I'm 57.
This is my high school hero, Kelly Fonville.
He was the first black shot putter, world champion from Michigan, Charles Fonville, F-O-N-D-I-L-L.
Later I met him at Penn State when we were out in Michigan for the Nationals.
Marley Gray and myself were rivals in the shot putter, and we were out in Michigan for the Nationals in 1954, and he was one of the judges of the shot put.
a competition with Charles Fonson.
He's a dentist out there now.
And I told him how much I admired him.
So it was like I used to see him at the Penn Relays in junior high school and high school, and to go out there in 54 to see him was another conclusion or whatever.
This is when I broke the... It was my mom.
It helped me.
I was a national champ, indoor AAU champ.
You were a chef.
Yeah, I was a state champ.
I was held with Pennsylvania State Records in Pennsylvania, the Class A big school, and I was undefeated in the discus row in high school, you know, throughout high school.
I was a state champ for three years in a row, and I held a state championship in the childhood for... Did you ever think of doing decathlon?
One of these articles tells one of the local writers think that I should participate as a council on.
But the only thing I couldn't do was broad, though.
I could run on good speed.
I ran 100, but I never trained for it.
I ran 220.
I ran a quarter.
I ran the mile relay, 880, and so forth.
We won the 10 relay for a senior year with Josh Cobra, who later went to the Olympics for the 400-meter hurdles.
He held the world's record.
He's on my team.
And now Cam Tellos, who held the world's record for the jab and throw.
He's from Norris.
And we always had, Norris in our high school always had the best track teams, you know, because in the state, even from the time my father was an athlete.
Here's Burt Bell, the commissioner.
Oh, Burt Bell.
NFL, right?
Yeah.
NFL?
Yeah, yes.
And Burt Adiego from Villanova.
And what's his name?
Raymond.
Here in my high school coach, John Sweeney, I was the athlete of the, some of the area athlete of the week, and the Maxwell Football Club, honored as I received this award I still have there.
And then as I said, I went on, these are some of these guys.
This is our state championship track team.
And what are the originals?
These are Xerox.
I have Xeroxed them all on acid-free papers.
I still have the original book, but the original won't last as long as we, you know.
So here's Josh Cobras who went on to make the Olympics.
You know, this is when we were sitting ready with Lenny Moore's team.
Lenny and I were rivals in high school.
And we became roommates, I mean, with Penn State.
We were, in the last half of the year, we were on the way to the state championship team.
And this is where I, this is the first time I broke the state record.
And then he went on to play great football with Baltimore Colts.
Baltimore Colts.
Yes.
And I understand you had a shot with the Giants.
Yes, yes.
And you didn't do it.
I didn't, I wanted, I had, I felt the, help me this time, I felt the,
You know, I gave my body to sports since I was in grade school and all.
And I wanted to keep my mind.
I was drawn to the humanitarian side of education and all that.
But, I mean, my dominary experience, people, some people could not apprehend or comprehend how, why I was an athlete and still loved poetry and books and music and chess and so forth.
because they had a stereotypical, at that time, you know, and even today, just some people say, are you still the same Charlie Block?
Are you still playing football?
They still see me.
Then they see me with my name here on the paper and television and all that.
Some of them, you know, it's confusing to them, you know, but other people said it's a good example that I present for Kisinaw, you know, because I show the balance.
Books have always been my first love.
I mean, I always loved to read.
I mean, I always had, not just practicing, but I read all the classics, I read all the fairy tales, and in the end, the odysseys, I mean, the great adventure stories.
I mean, I always was fascinated in those.
These are, this is, I went to Korea, this is a servant, but these are just, let me show you Rosie, Rosie Green.
These are all, and here's Sonia Sanchez, who is here.
Here's Charlie Fuller, who wrote a soldier story.
These are the kids I talk to every year, the Jewish kids and the African-American kids.
It's called Operation Understanding that Congressman Bill Gray, former Congressman Bill Gray from Philadelphia, and now the Negro, what you call, college, Negro, I can't take an accent, Negro College.
I know what you're saying.
United Negro College.
Well, right.
Bill has me, I mean, his group was black and Jewish.
promote understanding.
He sent them to Israel and sent them to Senegal, and they usually stop here at this collection, and I talk to them before they go over to the trip.
So here's the group here.
This is 86.
Yeah.
So this is current.
Well, then, this is... What I'm saying is that these scrapbooks are current.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
They're all up to date.
This one here is the Danes.
The Danish teachers used to come from Denmark every year.
I'm talking to them here.
What I'm saying is there's people here from all over the world.
This is when I was in Sweden.
I was talking to some children over in Sweden.
Sweden.
Yeah.
This is all in Swedish.
So tell me now, you were offered a
You were invited by the Giants, uh, to come to camp.
Is this what, uh, they drafted you?
Well, you know, they asked me to come out to try out, but Winnisky Park went out.
Yeah, I had a contract, you know.
You had a contract?
I mean, to sign, you know, the contract.
They sent me, I still have the contract.
It was $5,000.
$5,000, you know, to try out.
So you decided what?
To do what instead?
And then I decided I didn't want to do it, you know.
So what did you want to do instead?
I, I was, I just wanted to, um,
I don't know.
I went to the service.
I knew that was coming up because they were like, you know, did you go to the service?
From there, then I said, well, I'm going to get this out of the way.
I didn't want to play sports football anymore.
So I went to Fort Dix where I played football.
The team, we had an 8-2 record.
And when I went over to Korea, Rosie came in from the Giants of Follinger and played for them.
And then, you know, I didn't want to play anymore.
You know, I was just like,
But did you realize that you would be a collector at this point?
I always knew I was a collector.
I was a collector before I knew it.
But I mean that you would actually be building something, or were you planning to teach?
What I'm trying to figure is— No, no, I was planning—I wanted to be—well, I wanted to be, at first, going back to the early period of my life,
So Nick sort of bear with me because I'm still in this jet lag.
I have my mind in Brazil.
You don't mind if I get you on the track every Wednesday?
No, no, no, no.
But it had come together after a while because my mind is as sharp as it should be.
What I'm saying is that early part of my days, I always wanted to be, when I was young to my earliest part of my life, I was in grade school, I wanted to be, I guess, three things.
always, once I wanted to be a minister, I mean, I was like 7, 8th grade, maybe, that was high, but it was like, it wasn't pressing.
Then I wanted to be an archaeologist.
But then, history, history is, history has always played a dominant, I was always drawn to history, I was trying to look back to my high school
yearbook where one of my classmates wrote a little sketch on me and he said that I was always interested in history, this child always, even in high school.
As far as collecting, first I started collecting to satisfy, to prove that in my mind that I really didn't, that my subconscious mind, I didn't accept my teacher's comment as a challenge, not as something that I would hold against her.
I'm a curious person.
You know, being a collector, you have to be curious.
I mean, curiosity and self-pride had a lot to do with that, because I knew, as I said, I heard the old folks sitting around.
I always listened to old people, you know, old women talking around growing up and old men in the barbershop.
Their stories would always fascinate me about Jack Johnson and about slavery days and all that.
So I knew that some, you know...
In one sense, my mind said, we weren't supposed to be our schools, so we're all equal, that we weren't supposed to serve anyone, any group of people.
But at the same time, I guess her remark was used as a stimuli.
She stimulated me, my curiosity, to seek, to find, to search, to hunt, which I became saturated with as a collector.
Not that it dominated my mind.
Is the teacher still alive?
Well, I met her years later, you know, I mean, she was like, she was... And there's nothing... Yeah, yeah, yeah.
There's nothing personal, there's nothing... No, she's dead, she's dead.
But I mean, do you think she knew at some point what you had accomplished?
No, she told me later, she told me, you know, she said, you know, Charles, you have taught us all something, you know, about ourselves and history.
She said, I was raised this way, you know, this is what she heard from her parents.
It was a nice little... It was a nice ending to the story.
Yeah, it wasn't a...
What's the word I'm going to use?
The vindictive story.
I mean, it was like I respected her because, you know, she took the time.
She said, oh, Charles, black people were born to serve whites because this is what her books and all.
And she later became upset the way she was taught, you know.
She remembered making that comment.
Of course she did.
Yeah.
It probably bothered her all those years.
Especially as word probably got back that Charles was putting together.
She was a subject.
Major collection.
Yes, yes.
She was a subject to teacher.
Then she later got it.
But she was a nice person.
What grade were you in?
Do you remember?
Up in the fourth grade.
Yeah, the fourth grade.
Wow.
So what kinds of stuff did you start bringing home from the Salvation Army thing?
Do you have some of these?
Well, see, I have the Booker T. Wash, and then I have, you know, I have one of the
What else do I have?
A couple of Langston Hughes things.
I have about, oh, I have one in my mind.
Here's I grew up in junior high school.
Then I got into Black Boy by Richard Wright I have.
I got into Chester Hines, the book, If He Hotter, Let Him Go, his first book.
I have, what's the other book I have?
something by Oscar Michaud, his books on... Can you spell that M-I-C-H-A-U-D, probably?
Yeah, M-I-C-H... Oscar Michaud.
I'll check it out.
My mind is... Remind me when I get over... No problem.
So I would say that this collection, as comprehensive as it is,
I mean, this is not the kind of thing where you had a lot of money to spend, either.
No, money, as I said before.
I mean, you're not a man whose parents, as you already said, you're not from a millionaire's family.
No, because my father worked on a steel mill.
Later he started his own plastering, sorry, plaster.
Well, that was in high school.
He was the first black steel maker, the first helper for Allen Wood, A-L-L-A-N, Wood Steel Company.
Cutcha Hawk in Pennsylvania, which is not too far from Norristown.
So he became the first helper, the one to operate the oven.
He had to fight his way for the position and all, but he was able to do it.
What I'm trying to say is, you were a teacher?
Did you ever teach?
No, I taught.
What did you do professionally prior to?
Well, I went to the service, and I came out, and I started a janitorial business.
You're a businessman.
Yeah.
On the side, I was at Norristown Irish High School as the administrator in human relations and cultural affairs.
Invitory specialist in human relations and cultural affairs was my title, where I went to some of the schools.
I talked about ethnic history in the schools.
I interviewed teachers and principals.
I helped with affirmative action, I mean, human relations and all that.
But at the same time, I had a business on the side where
Most of the money I used, you know, somewhat for livelihood, but most of it I used just to continue my collection, you know.
Really?
But it was a small.
Right, but you were basically earning money to build, and you were using it to build the collection.
Well, probably some of, I guess a small percentage of it, Nick, was, went to books and all, but the extra small business I had, I had about three guys working for me, but
It provided me extra funds, you know, to continue my collection, because that was during the time of the 1960s when black power and black pride was at its peak, although I had a large collection before the 60s came.
And people used to wonder why I was collecting, you know, even from black people of African Americans, they would say, why, you know, not that many knew, because I was always sort of an introverted person, you know.
I was always drawn.
People were always drawn to me.
I was always outstanding.
In the school, people knew me, my talent and all, but they never knew my interest in books, per se, as far as collecting.
Because as I said at the time, a lot of black people did not know.
They were ashamed of their culture through ignorance.
I have a saying that the hand that holds the pen, the quill, and the pencil controls history.
In other words,
The people who were in control during those times I was growing up did not present history, the proper history, of African-American or Negroes or colored people, as we were called in those days.
So therefore, a lot of black people, African-Americans, were ashamed of the word black because the connotation meant black hand, black cat, everything evil.
So this is why the students today are proud of wearing these T-shirts that are black pride or African-Americans.
I was able to see...
a turnaround from my childhood days.
It's one of the kids I talk to when I travel around the country and people come here from all over the world and so forth.
It's delightful for me to know that I was a conduit, you know.
I mean, some of the awards I received, I had a special day in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania.
library, and the whole state gave me a special day, the key to the city, the key to the county, the key to my hometown, the governor, the legislature.
I had all that.
At the time, I never knew how far my books, you know, gave me, took me, I have two honorary degrees, and one's in Illinois, Lincoln University, the first black college.
I never knew, and this book here, I have, I'll keep talking to you, there's people from all over the world who have been in here.
You know, I keep writing.
What I'm saying to you, all the time that I was preparing myself, unknowingly that I was becoming a biblophile, a black biblophile.
As you can see, I saved everything.
I even saved my Christmas card, you know.
It's the collector.
It's the collector, because like Langston Hughes, our great writer, he saved his laundry slips.
And I read about other, from the article you read about, I Xerox for you, then after I was playing sports, I was able, through traveling in high school, not as much in high school, because I came to Philly in high school to collect the old bookstores.
Books were, you could pick up books for a dime, black books, you know.
People would discard black books, you know, African or Negro books.
And everything that said Negro, African, I mean, in other words,
Some of my better books did not say Negro, African, colored, West Indian.
I began to learn the value of the bibliography.
My mind became like a computer.
I could go into a bookstore.
I could see a title.
It doesn't have to say Negro, black, but I would recognize an author or a title.
I'm drawing the books.
Even today, I have a feeling, internal feeling, I guess you would call it, that
You know, I'm a hard worker and all, but there's days I need to just go.
I get the feeling I have to go out.
And sure enough, somewhere, there's something different out there for me.
It's like I relax in bookstores, in Korean bookstores, you know.
People say, how can you relax?
But I do, you know.
It's therapy for me, like a long-distance runner jogging, you know.
I mean, you have time to think.
Since I was an athlete, you know, and I jogged and all that, but it was the efficacy of...
of being there, the calmness, you know.
Serenity.
And discovery.
Beautiful.
How many people can you talk to?
The first thing I do when I go into a new city
be it Omaha, Nebraska, Des Moines, Iowa.
I look in the other pages of the used bookstores.
Yes, that's the first thing I used to.
I ask people, where am I?
If I say, you got 15 minutes, can you drive me to the used bookstores?
And I'll get lost in here.
I don't even know what time it is.
Well, Lenny Moore and Rosie used to, and other people, remember the team, Jesse Arnaldo, me and some of the other, used to go to the
to sorority houses first, you know, in the Spain city and all, whether in Boston or whatever.
I would always go to the bookstores.
Then I would go.
Then you would go to the sorority house.
You would go to the bookstore.
Well, Lenny and Rosie would, you know.
That's funny.
That's cute.
Oh, boy.
Lenny, Lenny, Lenny.
Number 74.
Yeah, Lenny's my best friend.
I didn't talk to anybody.
He's my best friend.
This is me.
against West Virginia.
Do you remember those days?
This is where it was Penn State and Syracuse.
This is the track.
Rosie and I were just like, Wyatt was a roommate.
And Lenny was... That's G-R-I-E-R in that.
Yeah.
Then there's Rod Perry who was on the track team.
He played in Swats.
He played with the husband of Jesse Tyson and Miss Jane Pittman.
Rod Perry, you know?
He's from Coatesville.
We were here on the same track team.
So we had, this is Chick Warner, our track team.
Yes, this is me here, right here, with Franklin Steel.
See, look, see?
Rose and I were his wife, it looks like that.
On the one hand, I said, Lenny and I were all here, number 32, right here.
You're number 42?
Yeah.
Number 42 was Lenny.
Lenny was 32.
Is that always your number, by the way?
Yeah, mm-hmm.
See, it's Lenny here.
That's a pretty great number, you know.
A lot of people have had it.
And we played against Jim Brown, and I played against Jim Brown.
O.J., a lot of the other guys have had, isn't O.J.'
's number 32?
Yeah, 32.
And here's, look, here's me.
They're describing me.
We played against Pitt.
This is my sophomore year.
You know, my junior year,
No, my sophomore year.
We upset J.C.
Carroll.
We upset what you call him.
Oh, okay.
Right.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Okay.
You played against Jim Brown?
Oh, yeah.
Did you get that?
But I was big, too.
I mean, I was a big four.
Here's what you call him.
This is my sophomore year.
They call me here.
They say this is the only nuisance for Penn State.
There's Tony Raiders and the Sterling Rocks a sophomore.
He's as good a back as some of the top kids we've seen all year.
Certainly he's as fast.
He's the Jake.
And then it says, Marion Martin.
It blocks him just runs over him.
He doesn't believe in being fancy.
They wanted me to go to Pitt.
I had 60 scholarships.
60?
Yeah, football and track in high school.
Wow.
You know, here's another one.
You know what I can hear?
This part?
Yeah.
They're so doggone big, I don't think we'll ever hit a team as big.
This is one of my... This is high school, right?
No, this is Penn State.
Penn State, okay.
University of Pittsburgh.
Here's one of my local write-ups.
This is Coach Engel.
It's my sophomore year now.
This is where I was
A youngster like Charlie Blockson renews your faith in mankind.
That's Rip Engle, E-N-G-L-E.
Who brought Joe Paterno?
That's right, Joe succeeded him.
The year I was there.
Yeah, that's right.
Joe came in the next year.
I was down there at 66, 67.
That's right.
And Joe was like, you know, he was like a system when I made the national trade.
This was my freshman year.
You're kind of proud of all this stuff.
Huh?
You're showing me, you know, the sports stuff.
You're very proud of it.
No, yeah, because this is my background.
This is the foundation.
This is how I got, this is what they say about Rosie and I, see?
Okay.
At what point did you realize, did it go from getting books to serious things?
Did you realize that you weren't just collecting for yourself, you were building an archive?
Well, I'm trying to think.
I'm going back to my mind and giving so many interviews.
I guess I really started thinking, when I used to go to New York, to the Schomburg, S-C-H-O-M-B-E-R-G collection, when I went to the Schomburg, you know, after indoor track meet at Madison Square Garden,
I won the National.
I was second.
I just missed it.
My junior year, the indoor meeting.
I was second.
My senior year, I won the National AU High School Indoor Shopkins Championship at Madison Square Garden, the old Madison Square Garden.
And then I took a trip.
I took the A train to Harlem.
Remember Duke Ellington, the A train to Harlem?
And then I got off at the Schomburg Center.
And as I described my article,
It just blew my mind, you know, to know that there was a collection of African books by black people written about and by black people that went back to the beginning of time, you know, and to see that they were all compiled in one room.
You know, it had a profound influence on me to know that I was not a loner in collecting, you know, books about our people.
It gave me...
the encouragement, the stimulation that I needed.
Well, the Schomburg collection, to know that Schomburg was a collector and that he had a similar experience of what I had as a child.
He was told that he didn't have any history or history.
Matter of fact, today, some of the people call me the modern Schomburg because he sold his collection for $10,000, which was nothing in those days.
He had about 10,000 books
I donated 20,000 items here, but today people said our lives are similar.
Here, it was like divine guidance, whatever, for me to go up there that day to see all these books.
And that's when I think I realized that I was a black bivio-phile.
You know, I, it didn't consume me.
I mean, it wasn't... The day you saw the Schaumburg... The Schaumburg... And all those collections of people who... And those pictures of...
distinguished black people, the statue of Ira Aldridge, the great black Shakespearean actor, I mean, the replica of... Vincent de Schaumburg.
Vincent de Schaumburg, yes.
You know, it's a beautiful piece of sculpture, and that's, because I always loved sculptures when I was a child, but the fact that that stimulated me... It's kind of like a shrine, isn't it?
Yes.
For you.
Yes, it was a shrine.
It was a shrine of...
of intellectual knowledge.
It was a shrine that reminded me of ancient Timbuktu, where I read about some of the books that I had about Timbuktu.
Up until that time, I thought that Timbuktu was a state of mind.
If you had an argument with a friend, you'd say, oh, I wish you were in Timbuktu.
But when I found that Timbuktu was a state of Africa, a place, a mystical place in Africa,
that no longer today is important.
But during that time, their top commodity wasn't gold, it was books.
You know, I mean, scholars gave them all over the world, I mean, to learn.
So I always had the secret desire to go to Timbuktu.
One day that I want to, I'm going to go.
The fact that being at Schomburg has stimulated me in becoming a collector.
an obsession.
Was it a challenge?
It was a challenge.
I would never say it was an obsession.
Some people, as you know, some collectors have an obsession.
And you say you don't?
I don't, no, because, I mean, no, you see, my life is sports.
You know, I mean, what you see now has been accumulated over years.
I mean, I don't think about books every day.
Well, it's a way of life, though.
It's a way, it's a part of it.
But even then, I have a Sagittarian interest in life.
Sagittarian?
I'm a Sagittarian.
interest in life.
I mean, I have interest in a lot of things.
I never let one thing dominate, because it was always more learned.
This is typical of Sagittarius?
Yeah, we're curious, and we're searchers, you know, the scientist, the hunter, and so forth.
I mean, I... Do you believe that stuff?
I believe in all of that, of course.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, I mean... I'm not putting it down.
No, no.
I believe that, you know, there's certain influences that we have.
I believe in all religions.
I mean,
I have friends who are atheists.
I mean, I have an open mind.
I mean, you really believe that having been born under a certain sign to some degree influences the way you are.
A little bit, yeah.
I would say a percentage of it, yeah.
I would say a percentage of a certain sign, because I'm not the people.
I don't want to get into that.
No, it's not.
I'm curious here.
But it's good.
But to me.
It's really quite irrelevant.
It's a good quote.
But also, it's good.
I'm a hunter.
I'm a searcher.
The son of a Sagittarian.
That I like a lot.
This is why I'm saying it.
I don't believe in a fool, no.
People read it every day, no.
You know, I first got that thought about you when I asked you.
You don't have a first Uncle Tom's cabin.
And you said, well, it's too much money.
You don't have a first edition of that.
No, because... A really obsessed person would want... No, I know, but not me.
I mean, Uncle Tom's cabin, I mean, it's important...
But I have Wheatley's.
Historically, as much as any.
Yes, I mean, the first edition, yes.
I mean, it's a key book for any collection.
I mean, I have, someday I'll get it, you know.
But my point is the obsessed collector.
Right, that's right, that's right.
He wouldn't even search you, no matter what kind of money, you know.
I have sacrifice, you know.
I've had holes in my shoes as a child, you know, wearing cardboard in order to get a book.
Of course, I went through that.
I'd save pennies, you know, I'd shine shoes, you know, to get another money.
At that time... Is there anything you really covet that you'd like to have?
Maybe covet's too strong a word.
Well, no, see, there's a book, several books on top of my... You must have a one.
The piece by Juan Latino, you know, his piece... Oh, my God.
Let's don't worry about it.
Yeah, there's a couple, like...
See, when talking to you, there's so many things that, you know, I'm trying to give you things I never had before, never said before, plus the fact that there's so much about book collecting, you know, I mean, the types of books I have, you know, I collect in every phase the breadth and depth of the African diaspora, which covers, you know, wherever black people live today on this earth.
I have interest, you know, I have some children's books,
all the way up to books on erotica, black erotica, which I have a piece by Pushkin, a book by Pushkin that he did, you know.
Then I have books by the church on books of people in Brazil, poetry, music, literature.
I mean, this is why people, when they come to the collection, they are satisfied because I'm able to, within the collection, I have
information on various subjects where sometimes you have to go to one library from one thing, another from, you know, this is why people have written these from all over.
I, when I started collecting, Nick, I started to collect the whole of our history, which I'm glad I did.
Some people collected, as you know, specialized.
Well, this is really a scholar's collection.
This actually is a research collection.
Yes, yes.
This is not a private focused collection of 315 lovely items.
which are fascinating to the person who owns it, but really it's not going to help the scholar in any great way.
The scholar has to come in and have a lot of stuff in a lot of different areas that's going to help he or she.
You answered the question a while ago, when did I decide?
It evolved within itself.
I couldn't have planned it any better than what I've had.
How many people do you know of who started in a hobby?
It wasn't an advocacy hobby, call it what you will.
a force, an energy force.
I mean, coming from a statement, partially from a teacher's statement, to be able to enjoy what I started out collecting.
I mean, I'm working at a position that I created in my own job.
It's like it's not even a job.
You understand what I mean?
It's like the greatest thing for me is when people come in here, an elderly person, a senior citizen,
You know, there are groups that come in from all over, and they say, son, if you're elected to them, thank you for telling me who I am before I die.
You know, I mean, this is what our child, for the children from the local community, from all over, they come from Princeton, Washington, you see school trips, you know.
At first they're sort of fidgety and they come in here.
Then you show them a Phyllis Wheatley signed Phyllis Wheatley or something written by Langston Hughes or Turner or James Baldwin or Leo Africanus who wrote about the history of Timbuktu.
And their eyes, you know, the light in a child's eyes, you know, and how they thank you.
They don't want to leave.
Football, pro football and all that.
That isn't, you know, or any other profession.
You know, money isn't, what I'm saying to you, money isn't everything.
Sure, I could have bought an Uncle Tom Camden years ago, but my greatest ecstasy is in giving.
In giving.
It's not
I'm not a Sarah Thomas Phillips, you know, obsession, you know, magnificent obsession to acquire, like some people.
I don't want every scrap of paper written by an author.
If I get it, okay.
What is meant for me, my golden rule out of the black video follows.
What is meant for me, I will have.
What is not meant for me, I will not have.
So I don't become upset over obsession, over searching.
However, it is of singular importance to you, and it's already been accomplished,
If this collection be maintained as a collection, you know, one of the themes that I'm exploring is why some people pass it, I mean, send it up to auction or break it up.
No, no, so you're getting questions, you're giving me answers to questions, that you, as a bibliophile, it's so easy, it's beautiful talking to you, because you feel, I can feel the beauty in your presence.
I could not, one of my stipulations in my contract
When I donated, I could have stole this collection, was the fact that it must forever, as long as the university is here, to be intact.
None of these books cannot circulate.
Sure, from time to time, it's the Smith-Thirty Library of Congress, someone wanted to use for exhibition.
The Morgan Library will loan the Huntington Library an item.
Yes, yes, yes.
You know, this is a standard procedure among similar institutions.
That's right.
And some items that will never leave.
There are certain books, like maybe a weekly,
Maybe a Wheatley, maybe a Nat Turner, or something.
Is this, by the way, is this the really great, is this the stuff that you have chosen to be in the office with you?
Mm-mm.
Or is this just stuff that happens to be in the office with you?
It happened to be here because we don't have the extra space, but we don't, and plus the size.
I was reaching, I was reaching a little too far.
No, no, no, but that's a good thought.
That's a good thought, Nick, because
Books are food for my soul.
I have books in my bedroom.
I have books here.
I mean, when you come in here, when people, certain people come into the collection, I want to get back to you and answer your question.
Certain people come to Charles or Mr. Box and we come in here.
Some people come here and stay at the door.
They stay there for a minute and they pause.
Some people come with tears in the eyes in the large structure in the room.
They said they could feel the presence.
I mean, not all people, and first people were growing the books.
I don't know how you felt when you came to my office.
I don't know how you felt when you came over there.
But the thing is, this is what I'm saying.
These are my friends.
These are my ancestors.
These books represent their lives, their trials and tribulations, and so forth.
When I'm depressed at times or whatever, I mean, I come in here.
as a reminder of what, say, Harry Tudman went through.
Harry Tudman.
I'm just saying that from my time.
Harry Tudman, you know, who led the Underground Railroad.
Later I wrote this article, this cover story.
Just for my typist.
Okay.
The cover story.
I think it's a cover story of a National Geographic magazine.
I don't know if I got that.
I read the cover story.
I'm familiar.
I'm sorry.
I wrote two articles for that.
That's pretty terrific.
I mean, I'm going to get a copy of it at some point.
Yeah, let me see.
I think I have extra.
Let me keep talking next.
I'll replace it.
Well, I'd like you to do the same with it.
You're going to give me one.
Of course.
What I'm going to do here, and I'll replace it from here.
I mean, they came to me, the National Geographic magazine.
I just love this.
And I thought it was a joke at first.
You know, I wrote two articles for them.
I wrote one of the Sea Islands.
It's called Sea Change in the Sea Islands, December of 87.
It's about the people, the Gullah-speaking people down in Charleston, South Carolina area, who is called Sea Change in the Sea Islands.
Sea Change in the Sea Islands, right?
Nowhere...
To lay down weary head.
That's a quote.
This is by me and the photographer.
See, it tells about the... Oh, that's great.
It tells about the... I'm very impressed.
That's one of the great ones to hit, is geographic as a writer.
This made my Book of the Month, one of the Book of the Months, called Choice Book of the Months.
This is your book?
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
I'm trying to get you together.
The old...
I won a national award for putting it together, 300 years in Pennsylvania State.
Who did this catalog?
It was a company that we hired.
I was in charge.
I was the director of it.
Are there any more copies of this?
That's probably the only one, right?
Yeah.
These are things I did that I keep in here.
And I'll give you this here, didn't I?
This is the day they honor me.
What are you looking for now?
You're looking for the geographic on the Underground Railroad.
Here we go.
Here's the one you can have.
I'll give another copy of that one.
Okay, I'm going to write down the stuff on this book.
We're talking about a Pushkin erotic poem from the Virgin Mary, Alexander Pushkin, and that P-U-S-H-K-I-N.
Gavrilida, G-A-V-R-I-L-I-A-D-A.
Is that what you pay for it?
You had to have it, right?
You know, because it's also a new guy.
It's by Pushkin who has African ancestors, plus the fact, you know, he was well known as Alexander Dumas of his black ancestors, plus the fact it's a book of erotica, and his double days publishing a book of erotica, this, that comes next spring, that will be dedicated to me.
Because of the people, like Alice Walker, I got.
Alice Walker.
You know, the writer, and a lot of the writers and so forth.
Tony Morrison probably was here.
Well, Tony's not in the book, but the editors, you know, they said, Charles, you give us Dr. Miriam de Costa-Willis, who came up with the idea.
She's at the University of Maryland now.
She was at George Mason.
She said, her husband said, before he died, she said, you're always writing these
academic books that no one was going to read.
Why didn't you write a good sex book?
And after he died, she thought about it and not become remorse.
She had three children.
One of her sons is a judge in Memphis.
She said, Charles, I came up with the idea.
So she sent this flower out, a flyer, asking people to, you know, write an erotica.
And then a couple people gave her my collection.
And I helped her.
And she said, well,
Well, I was low, and the other editors used stimulators and got all of these people laying all this.
So they dedicated this book to me, the anthology on Zacharyonica.
Some of them, well, they have people like Dennis Brutus.
I mean, most of these people, the writers... I'm going to go on the other side.
Okay.